The Top Ten Things Library Administrators Should Know About Technology
By Roy Tennant - Posted on September 12th, 2009


It's not insulting to say that those who run libraries tend not to
know all that much about technology. A very different set of skills
are needed to run an organization, and those skills do not often come
packaged along with technical knowledge and experience. But
administrators need to know some specific things about technology in
order to do their jobs well, so here is my list:

   1. Technology isn't as hard as you think it is. At least compared
   to years ago it isn't. Any reasonably competent library
   technologist can take a server from scratch to a fully-functioning
   web site in a day. And with services like Amazon's Elastic Compute
   Cloud (EC2), you don't even need hardware to get a site up and
   going in no time. Quite literally, you can go from nothing to a
   fully-functional LAMP stack (operating system, web server,
   database, and programming language) as well as any of a number of
   free content management systems (e.g., Drupal) in less than a
   day. Sure, there are some things that are still quite time
   consuming and complicated (e.g., writing software from scratch),
   but many of the basic services are today quite easy and fast.

   2. Technology gets easier all the time. I recall a time not all
   that long ago when installing software on Unix was a royal
   pain. You would need to download the release, then configure it,
   then compile it. And if you hadn't already installed required
   software dependencies (other applications this application needs),
   then you'd have to do those first. Now installing applications and
   any required dependencies can be as simple as a one-line command
   (e.g., "sudo apt-get install X"). Plus, there are now projects like
   Bitnami that have pre-packaged complete technology stacks that can
   take you from scratch to fully-functional in a variety of
   applications in no time at all.

   3. Technology gets cheaper all the time. I rent a server from a
   service provider, and have for years. Recently when I filled my
   disk drive I realized that I could pay the same amount per month
   but upgrade to a server with twice the RAM and more than twice the
   amount of disk space. Just keep breathing and what you can buy for
   the same amount of money gets better all the time.

   4. Maximize the effectiveness of your most costly technology
   investment -- your people. As technology itself falls in price per
   unit, your staff is likely to get more expensive. So pay attention
   to what is required to make the most effective use of them. This
   means getting them the training and resources they need to do their
   job well. I can't believe how many administrators skimp on hardware
   and make their staff make do with inadequate amounts of RAM and
   processors when they are the least expensive part of the
   equation. Believe me, you do not want your most expensive resource
   sitting around waiting for your least expensive resource to boot
   up.

   5. Iterate, don't perfect. Librarians seem to love perfection. We
   don't want to put any technology out for the public to use until we
   think it is perfect. Well, we need to get over ourselves. Savvy
   tech companies know the path to success is to release early and
   iterate often. One of the major benefits of this is that your users
   can provide early feedback on what they like and don't like,
   thereby providing essential input into further development. Do not
   be afraid of a "beta" or "prototype" label -- people are now
   accustomed to such, and it can provide the necessary "cover" to
   being less than perfect.

   6. Be prepared to fail. The twin to our tendency toward perfection
   is our fear of failure. But just like the pursuit of perfection is
   the enemy of progress, so is our fear of failure. Innovative
   organizations know that they will throw many things against the
   wall and only some will stick. But you don't usually know ahead of
   time which ones they will be, so you need to experiment, try things
   out, and see what works. This means you must be prepared for some
   experiments to fail. Just learn what you can and move on.

   7. Be prepared to succeed. Hardly any technology success can be
   truly successful without a set of associated non-technology efforts
   to support it. Full administrative support that is communicated
   throughout the organization is essential. Publicity is often key,
   to alert your user community to a new web site or tool. Don't make
   the mistake of implementing a technology well but fail to get it
   out the door properly.

   8. Never underestimate the power of a prototype. Prototypes are
   simple implementations of a new site or service that can help
   demonstrate what a fully-developed site or service would be
   like. Since many of us find it difficult to imagine a new site or
   service from a text description, prototypes can spark understanding
   in a way that few things can. Also, they tend to be much easier and
   faster to put together and can provide enough learning
   opportunities so that if you decide to support full development,
   the result will be more effective than it would have been
   otherwise.

   9. A major part of good technology implementation is good project
   management. Many technology projects are not as simple as just
   installing an application -- often the process is a long and
   complicated one that requires developing an implementation plan, a
   schedule, and coordinating with other affected individuals and
   departments. Therefore, many technology projects require good
   project management to be successful. Keep in mind that your best
   technologist may not be your best project manager -- this is why
   using teams is often the best implementation strategy for anything
   beyond minor projects.

   10. The single biggest threat to any technology project is
   political in nature. In the end, technology is the easy
   part. What's difficult is the people part. That's why your role, as
   library administrator, is the single most important role in any
   technology implementation. Are you willing to throw your political
   support behind it? Are you willing to invest the resources required
   to make it a success? Will you marshall the entire organization to
   support, promote, and use this new site or service? If not, simply
   don't bother. If yes, then welcome to what will likely be a
   successful project.

This is my list, and I welcome your comments on what would be on your
list, or if you prefer, arguments about where I went wrong. Effective
use of technology in libraries is too important to not get right.
